K8s annotation discovery blogpost (#5967)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/blog/2025/otel-collector-k8s-discovery.md

---
title: Kubernetes annotation-based discovery for the OpenTelemetry Collector
linkTitle: K8s annotation-based discovery

> date: 2025-01-24

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2025-01-27
```

experience for both administrators and users.

## Automatic discovery for containers and pods

Applications running on containers and pods become moving targets for the
monitoring system. With automatic discovery, monitoring agents like the
Collector can track changes at the container and pod levels and dynamically
adjust the monitoring configuration.

Today, the Collector—and specifically the receiver creator—can provide such an
experience. Using the receiver creator, observability users can define
configuration "templates" that rely on environment conditions. For example, as
an observability engineer, you can configure your Collectors to enable the
[NGINX receiver](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/v0.117.0/receiver/nginxreceiver)
when a NGINX pod is deployed on the cluster. The following configuration can
achieve this:

```yaml
receivers:
  receiver_creator:
    watch_observers: [k8s_observer]
    receivers:
      nginx:
        rule: type == "port" && port == 80 && pod.name matches "(?i)nginx"
        config:
          endpoint: 'http://`endpoint`/nginx_status'
          collection_interval: '15s'
```

> The above configuration will be enabled when a pod is discovered via the
> Kubernetes API that exposes port `80` (the known port for NGINX) and it's name
> matches the `nginx` keyword.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The previous configuration is enabled when a pod is discovered via the
Kubernetes API that exposes port `80` (the known port for NGINX) and its name
matches the `nginx` keyword.
```

([GitHub issue](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/issues/34427))!

## A solution

The solution is built on top of the existing functionality provided by the
[Kubernetes observer](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/v0.117.0/extension/observer/k8sobserver)
and
[receiver creator](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/v0.117.0/receiver/receivercreator).

The K8s observer notifies the receiver creator about the objects appearing in
the K8s cluster and provides all the information about them. In addition to the
K8s object metadata, the observer supplies information about the discovered
endpoints that the collector can connect to. This means that each discovered
endpoint can potentially be used by a particular scraping receiver to fetch
metrics data.

Each scraping receiver has a default configuration with only one required field:
`endpoint`. Given that the endpoint information is provided by the Kubernetes
observer, the only information that the user needs to provide explicitly is
which receiver/scraper should be used to scrape data from a discovered endpoint.

> That information can be configured on the collector, but as mentioned before,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That information can be configured on the Collector, but as mentioned before,
```

this is inconvenient. A much more convenient place to define which receiver can
be used to scrape telemetry from a particular pod is the pod itself. Pod’s
annotations is the natural place to put that kind of detail. Given that the
receiver creator has access to the annotations, it can instantiate the proper
receiver with the receiver’s default configuration and discovered endpoint.

The following annotation instructs the receiver creator that this particular pod
runs NGINX, and the
[NGINX receiver](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/v0.117.0/receiver/nginxreceiver)
can be used to scrape metrics from it:

```yaml
io.opentelemetry.discovery.metrics/scraper: nginx
```

> Apart from that, the discovery on the pod need to be explicitly enabled with the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Apart from that, the discovery on the pod needs to be explicitly enabled with the
```

following annotation:

```yaml
io.opentelemetry.discovery.metrics/enabled: 'true'
```

In some scenarios, the default receiver’s configuration is not suitable for
connecting to a particular pod. In that case, it’s possible to define custom
configuration as part of another annotation:

```yaml
io.opentelemetry.discovery.metrics/config: |
  endpoint: "http://`endpoint`/nginx_status"
  collection_interval: '20s'
  initial_delay: '20s'
  read_buffer_size: '10'
```

It’s important to mention that the configuration defined in the annotations

> cannot point the receiver creator to another pod. The collector will reject such

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
cannot point the receiver creator to another pod. The Collector will reject such
```

configurations.

In addition to the metrics scraping, the annotation-based discovery also
supports log collection with filelog receiver. The following annotation can be
used to enable log collection on a particular pod:

```yaml
io.opentelemetry.discovery.logs/enabled: 'true'
```

Similar to metrics, an optional configuration can be provided in the following
form:

```yaml
io.opentelemetry.discovery.logs/config: |
  max_log_size: "2MiB"
  operators:
  - type: container
    id: container-parser
  - type: regex_parser
    regex: '^(?P<time>\d{4}-\d{2}-\d{2} \d{2}:\d{2}:\d{2}) (?P<sev>[A-Z]*) (?P<msg>.*)$'
```

If the set of filelog receiver operators needs to be changed, the full list,
including the default container parser, has to be redefined because list config
fields are entirely replaced when merged into the default configuration struct.

The discovery functionality has to be explicitly enabled in the receiver creator

> just by adding the following configuration field:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
by adding the following configuration field:
```
